---
layout: post
title: "Building A Log-Structured Merge-Tree: Part 3"
date: 2020-12-13
---

[Last time](https://patrickgombert.com/2020/lsmt-part-2/) we looked at flushing the memtable to disk and by producting a series of Static Sorted Table (SST) files that held all of the memtable's key value pairs. I think that maybe that blog came out of order, but we're going to roll with it. We'll just have to do some hand-waving this time around to progress through this blog. We'll introduce an `SSTManager` to help implement the public interface of the LSMT, and we'll fill it in next time. For now, we can understand the `SSTManager` to be abstract and not dwell on the implementation.

#### Internal State ####

The `lsmt` struct we will store the internal state for the running database. We'll keep the user provided `Options`, the active memtable, any memtables waiting to flushed to disk (inactive memtables), the `SSTManager` which will manage our on disk SST files, a lock for flushing to disk (we'll build out the plumbing for flushing to disk in a later blog), and a `closed` flag.

{% highlight go %}
type lsmt struct {
  options           config.Options
  activeMemtable    *mt.Memtable
  inactiveMemtables []*mt.Memtable
  sstManager        sst.SSTManager
  flushLock         common.Semaphore
  closed            bool
}
{% endhighlight %}

We'll go over how these are used in the public interface in this blog and get into more detail in subsequent blogs. For now know that we're going to hand the user an instance of the `lsmt` struct when they open the database.

### Public Interface ###

The public interface for the LSMT is going to be pretty small and straightforward. Over time we'll piece together the components behind the interface, but from here on out this will be a stable interface. We'll need to keep this interface in mind and remember that everything under the hood is in service of these five functions.

{% highlight go %}
func (db *lsmt) Get(key []byte) ([]byte, error)
func (db *lsmt) Write(key, value []byte) error
func (db *lsmt) Delete(key []byte) error
func (db *lsmt) Iterator(start, end []byte) (common.Iterator, error)
func (db *lsmt) Close() error
{% endhighlight %}

#### Write and Delete ####

From previous posts we'll recall that that only the memtable accepts writes. Since `Write` and `Delete` are the only non-read functions in the public interface it might be easiers to start here since the scope of the implementation is then limited to effecting the memtable. 

The implementation for `Write` is [here](https://github.com/patrickgombert/lsmt/blob/27ea6a0a3f069007f6a2bdee3b46fffb3f0f96d7/lsmt.go#L78). We do some checks up front, namely, we ensure that the database isn't closed, that the key and value aren't nil or of size 0, and that the key and value conform to user specified options. If the write passes those checks then we simply invoke the `Write` method on the active memtable.

`Delete` is very similar, except it only takes a key instead of the key and value pair. The implementation for `Delete` is [here](https://github.com/patrickgombert/lsmt/blob/27ea6a0a3f069007f6a2bdee3b46fffb3f0f96d7/lsmt.go#L98). We'll notice that `Delete` actually performs a `Write` to the active memtable and that it writes a `Tombstone` value. This means that in our functions that perform reads we'll need to treat `Tombstone` values as deleted values. Since the LSMT works in levels we use Tombstone to track deletes through the levels. The special tombstone value can only be written during `Delete`s.

#### Get ####

The [Get](https://github.com/patrickgombert/lsmt/blob/3cb31ab7b485a11e72cbb340c7995c216a5ece87/lsmt.go#L49) implementation is going to move through the available layers until it can find a value for the key being searched. There's some special case logic in here for the `Tombstone` value. If, at any point, a `Get` to an underlying `Memtable` or the `SSTManager` returns a `Tombstone` value then we'll return `nil` to the user to signify that the key has no value.

#### Iterator ####

At a high level, the `Memtable` and the `SSTManager` both provide `Iterator`s to their own data. However, users of the LSMT don't necessary want or need to know about the implementation details here, to the user there is only one `Iterator` type and it's for the entire LSMT. Since this is the public interface's `Iterator` implementation we'll have to hide all of the implementation details.

In order to provide one single iterator then we'll need an abstraction that allows many `Iterator`s to compose into one `Iterator` instance. In service of this we'll introduce the [MergedIterator](https://github.com/patrickgombert/lsmt/blob/3cb31ab7b485a11e72cbb340c7995c216a5ece87/common/merged_iterator.go). The `MergedIteraor` will compose iterators, but has a few properties that are desirable for our use case. First, it will only produce one value per key. That means if that two or more of the underlying `Iterator`s have the same key, only one key/value pair for that key will be returned.

Second, is that it resolves the multiple key problem by looking at `Iterator`s in the order they are passed in. In our case, that means that we'll order the `Memtable` before the `SSTManager` such that if both of their `Iterator`s have the same key we'll take the `Memtable`'s value for that key since it's the most up to date.

Later on we'll see that we might need to even compose `MergedIterator`s into `MergedIterator`s and we'll see how powerful of an abstraction this can be. But, for now we'll use a `MergedIterator` in our public interface's `Iterator` [implementation](https://github.com/patrickgombert/lsmt/blob/main/lsmt.go#L121).

One thing to note in this implementation is that we have the `inactiveMemtables` which we'll order behind the `activeMemtable` but in front of the `SSTManager`.

### Close ####

Close will cause the database to stop accepting writes and do the background work to stop the LSMT. For now we'll just set the `closed` struct value to `true` to signal that the database has been closed.

### Next Up ###

Next time we'll start to look at an implementation of the `SSTManager` for block based SST storage.
